REP 2004 extras (#235)
ros-infrastructure/rep: rep-2004.rst

Such a package may upgrade to 'Level 1' at a later date, if it proves to be a solution that people want to use in their products.

Tools, like ``rostopic``\ , generally do not fall into this category either, but are not categorically excluded.
For example, it may be the case that the tool which launches and verifies a ROS graph (``ros2launch``\ ) may need to be considered 'Level 1' for use in production systems.

Package Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements to be considered a 'Level 1' package:

#. **Version Policy:**

   #. Must have a version policy (e.g. ``semver``)
   #. Must be at a stable version (e.g. for ``semver`` that means version >= 1.0.0)
   #. Must have a strictly declared public API
   #. Must have a policy for API stability
   #. Must have a policy for ABI stability
   #. Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS distribution

#. **Change Control Process:**

   #. Must have all code changes occur through a change request (e.g. pull request, merge request, etc.)

>    #. Must have confirmation of contributor origin (e.g. `DCO  <https://developercertificate.org/>`_, CLA, etc.)

Author: @wjwwood not sure if this accurately generalizes the DCO requirement

Package Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements to be considered a 'Level 1' package:

#. **Version Policy:**

   #. Must have a version policy (e.g. ``semver``)
   #. Must be at a stable version (e.g. for ``semver`` that means have a version >= 1.0.0)
   #. Must have a strictly declared public API
   #. Must have a policy for API stability
   #. Must have a policy for ABI stability
   #. Must have a policy that keeps API and ABI stability within a released ROS Distribution

#. **Change Control Process:**

   #. Must have all code changes occur through a change request (e.g. pull request, merge request, etc.)

>    #. Must have `Developer Certificate of Origin (DCO) <https://developercertificate.org/>`_ on pull requests

Author: @wjwwood since this is new - is DCO only required in Level 1?

Reviewer: I'm not sure. Any packages at lower quality levels could always implement DCO checking even if they're not aiming for level 1, but the question remaining is should be enforce it for lower packages.

I'll bring this up at the next ROS 2 meeting for discussion.

Sometimes the justification will be a link to a policy documented in the package itself or it may link to a common policy used by a group of packages.
If there is additional evidence that these policies are being followed, that should be included as well, e.g. a link to the coverage statistics for the package to show that coverage is being tracked and maintained.
Other times, justification will be an explanation as to why a requirement was not met or does not apply, e.g. if performance tests do not make sense for the package in question, it should be satisfactorily explained.

There is no enforcement or checking of these claims, but instead it's just sufficient to present this information to potential users.
If the users feel that the justifications are insufficient or incorrect, they can open issues against the repository and resolve it with the maintainers.

There should be one or more communal lists of 'Level 1' (and maybe 'Level 2' or 'Level 3') quality level packages.
These lists should be modified via change requests (maybe a text document in a repository) so that there can be peer review.

> This document will not prescribe how or where these lists should be hosted, but one thought is that the list could live on the main ROS 2 documentation website.

Author: @wjwwood should I just create this page now and link it here? it would be better for the REP but presumably wouldn't have any content yet/for a while

Reviewer: Not sure. I hesitate because I don't know where it should live (in the `ros2/ros_documentation` repository or a separate repository similar to how REPs are in their own `ros2/rep` repository). It's possible a REP which is continually updated might be a good way to do it too, sort of how we update REP-2000 for each new ROS 2 release. I'll mention this in the next ROS 2 meeting.

Performance Testing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are some cases where performance testing does not make sense to have.
For example, it may be a good idea to have performance tests for a code generator (like ``rosidl_generator_cpp``), but it is not strictly required since its performance does not affect a runtime production system, and so in that case the package could claim to be 'Level 1' without performance tests if properly justified in the "quality declaration".

However, if performance is a reasonable concern for use in a production system, then there must be performance tests and they should be used in conjunction with a regression policy which aims to prevent unintended performance degradation.
Note, the performance regression policy should not prevent regressions, but instead should aim to detect them and either address them directly, plan to address them in the future, or, when unavoidable (e.g. fixing a bug required more resources to be safe), explain why the regression has occurred in the memorandum of the change request that introduced it.

> Dependencies

Author: @wjwwood I heavily rearranged this part, just double check it still makes sense

Package Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements to be considered a 'Level 3' package:

#. **Version Policy:**

   #. The same as 'Level 1' packages, except:

      #. *No public API needs to be explicitly declared, though this can make it harder to maintain API and ABI stability*
      #. *No requirement to keep API/ABI stability within a stable ROS release, but it is recommended still*

#. **Change Control Process:**

   #. Must have all code changes occur through a change request (e.g. pull request, merge request, etc.)
   #. Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests

#. **Documentation:**

   #. Must have a declared license or set of licenses
   #. Must have a copyright statement in each source file

>    #. May have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package meets each of the requirements

Author: are the "May..." statements the same as the "recommended" statements? for example level 3 `1.i.b`: `No requirement to keep API/ABI stability within a stable ROS release, but it is recommended still`

i mapped all the "may..." sentences to ● in the chart but idk if that's accurate

      #. *Must have a section in the repository's ``README`` which contains the "quality declaration" or links to it*
      #. *May register with a centralized list of 'Level 3' packages, if one exists, to allow for peer review of the claim*

#. **Testing:**

   #. No explicit testing requirements, though covering some if not all of the features with tests is recommended

#. **Dependencies:**

>    #. May have direct runtime "ROS" dependencies which are not 'Level 3' dependencies, but they should be documented

Author: level 3's dependencies section is the only one that mentions that dependencies should be documented (making it difficult to give it a ✓ or ● compared to level 1).

should the fact that dependencies and all their caveats and justifications need to be documented be added to level 1's dependencies section as a standalone requirement (`5.iv`) or to level 1's (and all subsequent levels) documentation section (`3.v Must have a "quality declaration" document, which declares the quality level and justifies how the package AND ITS DEPENDENCIES meet each of the requirements?`)?

Reviewer: By "documented" I think I meant, "documented as part of the quality declaration". So I don't think it needs updating in the documentation requirements. Instead I'd suggest making this point more specific, that we mean the dependencies should be considered and covered by the quality declaration.

All packages should have at least a declared license or set of licenses and should include copyright statements in each file.

Repository Organization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since these categories are applied on a per package basis, and since there may be more than one package per source repository, it's recommended that the strictest set of policies apply to the whole repository.
This is recommended rather than trying to mix processes depending on which packages are changed in a given change request (pull request or merge request, etc.).
If this is too onerous, then it's recommended to split lower quality packages out into a separate repository.

Reference Implementation
========================

The `ROS 2 Developer Guide <https://index.ros.org/doc/ros2/Contributing/Developer-Guide/>`_ describes the policies we implement to achieve Quality Level 1 for ROS Core packages.

The `rcutils package's quality declaration <https://github.com/ros2/rcutils/pull/202/files>`_ is one example of the conditions of this REP in practice on a non-trivial package.

.. update link when that draft is merged

> Quality Declaration Template

Author: @wjwwood this is a possible location for the template. another option is having a folder in the /rep repo for rep2004 and putting the file in there, and linking from the reference implementation section. some other reps have folders with images. might be "cleaner" and still technically "self-contained". also easier for others to reference or copy.

Reviewer: Sure, I don't mind. It's pretty each to reference a subsection in the REP as well, but I really don't mind.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: markdown

  This document is a declaration of software quality for the `<package name>` package, based on the guidelines in [REP-2004](https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2004.html).

  # `<package name>` Quality Declaration

> 

Author: @wjwwood rep0001 says the Backwards Compatibility section doesn't need to be included if there isn't anything to say - just double checking

Package Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requirements to be considered a 'Level 4' package:

#. **Version Policy:**

>    #. No requirements, but having a policy is still recommended (e.g. ``semver``), even if the version is not yet stable (e.g. >= 1.0.0 for ``semver``)

Author: the `even if the version is not yet stable (e.g. >= 1.0.0 for ``semver``)` part of this can't be mapped to the chart, another reason to maybe keep the written requirements along with the chart.

Reviewer: Isn't it just an empty spot in the `1.i` part of the chart?

Author: It's actually an empty spot for `1.ii` (`Must be at a stable version (e.g. for semver that means have a version >= 1.0.0)`), but I'm leaning towards leaving the written requirements and the chart anyway so it's not an issue either way

#. **Change Control Process:**

>    #. No explicit change control process required, but still recommended

Author: this one was hard to map to the chart because it's not recommending any specific step of the change control process, just the whole thing. so that would mean a ● for level 4's `2.i - 2.v`, but `2.ii`, `2.iii` and `2.v` aren't even "recommended" for levels 2 and 3. why would level 4 be more stringent than 2 and 3?

Reviewer: Yeah, the point of this was "all things under change control are optional, but recommended", but it isn't precise. I'm not sure what to do here, what do you think we should do?

Author: Well, "all things optional, but recommended" is kinda the case for everything right? based on line 59:

> While each quality level will have different requirements, it's always possible to overachieve in certain requirements even if other requirements prevent a package from moving up to the next quality level.

That doesn't mean we should put a dot in every spot on the chart though.

I guess the better question is are any of the steps _highly_ recommended for level 4?
Levels 2 and 3 don't require or even highly recommend having DCO, a peer review policy, or documentation for all change requests. 
So I think it's safe to assume what you're highly recommending is just the first point, all changes must go through a change request.
And so maybe it's a good idea to change this line to:

```suggestion
   #. No explicit change control process required, but it is recommended all changes occur through a change request.
```

#. **Documentation:**

   #. Must have a declared license or set of licenses
   #. Must have a copyright statement in each source file

#. **Testing:**

   #. No explicit testing requirements, though covering some if not all of the features with tests is recommended

#. **Dependencies:**

   #. No restrictions

#. **Platform Support:**

   #. May support all tier 1 platforms for ROS 2, as defined in `REP-2000 <https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-2000.html#support-tiers>`_

Any package that does not claim to be 'Level 3' or higher is automatically 'Level 4'.
Refer to the detailed description of the requirements following the Quality Level 1 section above for more information.

Quality Level 5
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Packages in this category cannot even meet the simple 'Level 4' requirements, and for that reason should not be used.
All packages should have at least a declared license or set of licenses and should include copyright statements in each file.

> Quality Level Comparison Chart

Author: one reason leaving all the written sections with the chart doesn't work is that the auto numbering makes it so the requirements' numbers don't all match level 1. for example, level 1's `2.iv` is `Must have Continuous Integration (CI) policy for all change requests` but for level 2 the same requirement is listed as `2.ii` because it doesn't have all the other requirements level 1 does. this makes the numbered rows in the chart slightly ambiguous because `4.i` means different things for different levels.

this can be fixed by manually numbering requirements in the lists for 2+ to match level 1, or rearranging the requirements in level 1 so they match the order in which they're deprecated in the following levels. 

didn't do any of this yet because we don't know what we're doing with the chart yet.
